<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>


</head>
<body style="background-color:white;">
The Enlightened Path to Virtual Popularity
			

				Apr 26, 2013
						12 Comments					
								James Mathe
				
                    KICKSTARTER ADVICE                

									 marketing 
				
				
			
			

			
				
 
The Enlightened Path to Virtual Popularity
 

I’ve seen many great looking games or great ideas just languish on Kickstarter and they really did a good job with their campaign page. So what went wrong? In almost all these cases the project creators came out of the woodwork as an unknown until the day they posted their project. Crowd Funding sites (including the big mall of a site: Kickstarter) cannot promote your project on their own enough to get funded. It is certainly not a case of posting it and they will come!
Much of your success on a crowd funding site depends on your social network / reach. You need to begin working on this weeks before you plan to launch your campaign. You need to have several hundred likes on Facebook and hundreds of followers on Twitter as well as a presence on many other social sites, forums and blogs. You will also need to start working on creating a direct mailing list. These sources can account for 25-50% of your funding!
First, a couple general notes from the marketing guru Alexi Vandenberg of Rabid Fanboy…
Your website isn’t as important as your mailing list and social networking. People don’t “find” your website on their own – they find it from marketing. The back your project on Kickstarter not your website. So it’s your marketing that needs the most exposure, and you usually want to point them to Kickstarter, not your website. Sure your website is still important but don’t waste a disproportional amount of time and money on it.
As a creator your project is important, do not take anything personal. If a donor asks a question it is probably because he doesn’t understand the project and is honestly curious. I have seen many creators get very short if someone asks a question regarding the product. That is more detrimental than they realize because that person has friends. It only takes one example of obnoxiousness or rudeness for someone to change their mind about buying your product and, on the internet, such examples can travel widely, especially in fandom circles.
Don’t panic with the doldrums. Sales and fund-raising has ebbs and flows. If funding has stopped completely then there is a problem; but if it slows or is moving in fits and starts but is still going towards your goal, do not suddenly change your entire marketing strategy to make it more “sexy”. Marketing is sometimes not so much flashy as it is steady messaging. Changing suddenly smacks of something going wrong and undermines confidence in your product.
Now onto the meat…
GETTING LIKES, FOLLOWS &amp; MAILING LISTS?

On Any Site
Follow / Friend others and they will do the same back
Make sure your fans are part of the conversation. Ask questions or seek feedback. Engagement is key.
Be a part of the community, ask questions and engage conversations
Post regular, informative, and helpful posts and replies
Always include pictures and/or links in everything you post.
Reply to other people’s posts and tweets, don’t just like them.
Get others to share your posts and retweet your messages.
Leave relevant comments on other people’s blogs and leave your FB page URL
Reach out to bloggers, podcasters, news sites and more to at least mention your product page.
Attempt to reach outside the industry/gamer sites to find people who may be interested in the theme/topic of your game. Try comic book sites for example.
Encourage posts to Reddit about your project.
Join Meetup.com groups and attend Events in your area playing games
Post/tweet/share pictures of people actually playing your game
Run a Contest or a Fan of the Month promotion
Facebook
Create a group for your game or company. Then run a contest to give something away to people who join it. Groups are much better than a page because when you post to them everyone gets a notice, whereas with a page only 5% or less do (sometimes even when promoting the post in the page).
Share other Facebook posts of similar products
Link to your Facebook page in your signature on forum posts
Join other groups on Facebook
Post interesting stuff to OTHER groups/pages besides your own or your own feed
Install a LIKE button or Widget or Feed on your website or blog – https://developers.facebook.com/docs/reference/plugins/like/
Create/share things that are interesting or inspiring or funny to gamer geeks
Use Interactive YouTube annotations to drive likes from your videos
Link to your Facebook page from your Linked-in profile
Create a poll for people to vote on.
Pay to promote a post with a great picture on your page.
Promote LIKES as a stretch goal in your campaign
Use a “LIKE-Gate” tab on your page for exclusive content reveal, such as game rules or some PnP content. http://ustandout.com/facebook/how-to-promote-your-facebook-pages-like-gate-tab-to-get-more-likes
Use status tagging – Status tagging is a cool and fairly new feature of Facebook This feature allows you to tag any page or person by entering the @ sign and then typing the name of the page or person you want to tag.
Connect your Facebook page to Twitter and allow it to tweet your posts. https://www.facebook.com/twitter/
Find yourself more friends – http://www.facebook.com/find-friends/
Take small fliers (with QR codes pointing to your FB page) to events &amp; conventions you attend
Run a demo at your local gaming stores and give participants your flier
If you can find a way to highly target the audience for a FB add and you have a budget, you can get some likes for 10-25 cents each.
Obviously, invite your friends to your page 🙂
FACEBOOK ADS: The key to ads on FB is the narrowing of your target audience. Make sure you only target the US, Canda, and EU and try to only target people who also like popular games in our market. Also, if you have a mailing list, upload it and let it parse it up – then run a campaign that reaches 1 or 2% look-alike accounts. In short, FB ads work and quite well when done well. But you need to highly target your audience and have multiple images / add copy being used to grab attention. Then put more money into the ones that seem to be resonating. You’ll need to spend $50 or more. These things are done through the Ads Manager. Don’t just promote a post, make an ad.
Twitter
Use # tags, like #boardgames, to alert people of your topic
Use @username to get the attention of key people (don’t use more than 2 or 3 per tweet or you’ll get flagged for spamming)
Follow the “smores” (social media whores) – All the board game or RPG people you can find, many will follow you back.
Re-tweet others who tweet things of interest to you
Asking for follows and retweets on Twitter is acceptable.
Mailing List
Use SurveyMonkey.com where you can get input from 100 people for free… so why not ask questions about what people want out of your game or campaign? When they fill out your short (3-4 questions) survey you can ask for their email address
Collect emails from your contests
When running demos collect people’s email addresses
Get emails from previous campaigns you’ve run
Use a subscribe form on your website
 
THE DON’T’s

Don’t waste your time on Fiverr.com or other paid likes sites.
Avoid outright asking everyone for likes/follows (friends are OK)
In general don’t pay for broad FB ads to get likes (they will cost you too much and are not quality likes)
Don’t plan your success around getting staff picks, they are not as integral to success as you might think.
Don’t spam groups or pages that are for discussions, instead ask for feedback about your product or campaign on them.
 

SOCIAL NETWORKING
Avoid using Social Networking only as an advertising platform to push product. See it as a place to have a conversation and gather feedback about your product. Posting product info isn’t bad, but it can quickly wear thin.
The number-one rule for success within a community or social platform is to engage in the relevant conversations that are taking place and add value when doing so.
Tell users how the feedback you get from them is impacting your business and what you’re doing with the feedback. Few people will give suggestions or feedback if they know the company ignores it.
Use the follow friends on Kickstarter to share purchases
The comments on your project should be considered social networking as well and you should remain engaged (especially in the first and final days).
Facebook (1-5 times a week)
Make a company and/or product page on Facebook
Create an easy-to-remember URL – https://www.facebook.com/username
Create a good-looking page with nice header and fill out the ABOUT section.
Remember, each posting to your page only reaches a small percentage of your follower’s news feeds.
Promoting posts for $5 or $10 works (if you want to reach outside the country you live in you need to setup an ad manually)
Targeted Ads – if you do spend money on ads on FB make sure they are highly targeted. Make sure you target just a couple countries (USA, Canada, UK, Australia, and German are the big ones)
Create a launch party event and invite people to it so they feel a part of the event
Say something with context, not just – HEY BACK MY CAMPAIGN!
LIKE the comments left about your posts.
Post to promotion pages like: https://www.facebook.com/KickstarterGamesFan
Google+ (1-3 times a week)
There are two types of accounts on G+ — a personal account, and a business page. Create a business page: http://www.google.com/+/business
Being search engine driven, make sure you include Keywords and Relevant Links on your about page
The things that separates Google+ from Facebook is that brands can appear at the top of Google search results as well as status updates.
Google Events feature allows Google+ users to send out customized invitations to anyone regardless of whether they are Google+ users. It syncs with Google Calendar and shows up automatically when a user confirms for an event.
Join the many game groups found on Google+
With Circles, you can segment their followers. They can sort by different customer types, new customers, old customers, prospective customers, etc
You can take advantage of Circles by sending coupons to just prospective customers or having specials for current customers
Hangouts (chat/video rooms) can be used during the final hours of your event to help drive the hype and backing frenzy. Give it sort of a party feel. I’ve personally seen hundreds of dollars added by existing backers in attempts to meet the next stretch goals.
Google is YouTube, and integration of videos is a key factor in Google+
Twitter (3+ times daily)
Get a Twitter account and plan to keep up the tweeting, it’s not hard
Re-tweet the other people who tweet about your product or things similar
Thank people for re-tweeting you.
Judiciously include # hashtags like #boardgames or #gencon when you post
Follow everyone who follows you
Small talk on Twitter goes a long way toward building brand loyalty.
Share interesting things and topics not just your own spam. Be kind and click other people’s TWEET buttons on their blogs and sites.
Tweet whenever you back someone else’s project.
Tweet during USA peak times such the evening.
Keep your posts short enough to retweet. Remember it adds text when you do.
LinkedIn (Once a week)
Join and make some posts to game groups
Follow others active in the gaming groups.
Make profile updates when you have some big news like launch or updates.
Pinterest (as needed)
Your game should look cool, right? Some bits look especially cool! Post them here for people to share and look at.
YouTube (as needed)
Post all your videos to YouTube as well as Kickstarter (or whichever) as YouTube has its own social aspects.
Use annotations to point to your product &amp; pages.
Don’t forget you can share video on most social networks as well as pictures, so share your videos!
Reddit (Once per forum)
Posts to just promote your product are frowned on and won’t get you much of anywhere
Post a topic/subject that’s engaging
Reply to other posts in your categories
Schedule a Reddit IAMA – Ask Me Anything event
Forums: /r/boardgames, /r/boardgamedesign, /r/kickstarter, /r/rpg, /r/tabletop, /r/Pathfinder_RPG
 

COMMUNITY REACH
You don’t want to pollute forums and such you’ve never been to before, but that doesn’t mean you can’t start building connections to those sites now. Find forums that are for similar interests, join their conversations, ask questions, be friendly, and when your campaign does launch you can more naturally invite them to check it out.
BoardGameGeek.com (daily)
Create a Database entry on BGG and upload some pictures
Post a designer blog at BGG during the campaign
Post to the forums as regular as you can
Post your game to the Kickstarter pages:http://www.boardgamegeek.com/thread/746926/crowdfunding-announcements-thread
Add to the kickstarter forumhttp://www.boardgamegeek.com/forum/915012/kickstarter/general
Become a part of the community and help others
To any valid Geek Lists your game fits, such as this one: Kickstarter Boardgame Projects
Post major updates to BGG as well
RPG.net (Role-playing Games)
Become a part of the community and help others
Post major updates to RPG.NET as well
News Sites &amp; Blogs
KickTraq
Tabletop Gaming News
The Miniatures Page
Purple Pawn
Game Salute News
Game Bugle
Crowd Funding Friendly Reviewers
Before the launch of your campaign, you need to have arranged a third party review of your game or at least an interview.
CasualGameRevolution.com
UndeadViking Video Reviews
Drive Thru Review
The Dice Tower
Dice Hate Me.com/
Penny Arcade Report
The Gaming Gang
The Spiel
Geek Dad
Father Geek
G*M*S Magazine
Rahdo Runs Through
2d6.org
Crits Happen.net/
Watch It Played
Opinionated Gamers
Drake’s Flames
Board to Death TV
On Board Games
I Slay the Dragon
The Cardboard Jungle
GreyElephant Gaming
Something Awful Game Forums
Podcasts
Try to get some exposure with popular video and podcasts
Do an interview or give them your game to try out
Have them link to your Facebook page before the campaign
Mailing List (weekly)
Include call to actions or discounts
Be brief and to the point, people don’t read long emails
Make sure you use HTML and include pictures and formatting
Track your source and clicks using special URLs from BIT.ly – see my blog post “Myth Busters – Kickstarter Referrer Page?”
Your own Website / Blog (weekly)
Write about your ideas, your game, and path to production
You could help educate your followers about crowd funding by providing them with these links on your pages and tweets to get them prepped.
Conventions
GTS – Trade show to get exposure to retailers.
Origins – Decent board and war game exposure.
GenCon – Huge audience of all kinds. Best vendor exposure.
BGG.CON – Great exposure to alpha card and board gamers.
Essen ‘Spiel – European market exposure from casual to hardcore gamers.
 
PAID ADVERTISING
Gamerati Network Banners – Reaches mainly RPG fans
RPG.NET Banners – Great for RPG games
BGG Banners – Expensive but good exposure for card &amp; board games.
Google ad-words – Can get expensive and poor quality clicks.
Facebook promote – Good cheap buys on a great graphic post work.
Fortress AT – Cheap exposure to some Ameritrash gamers
Tabletop Gaming News – Cheap exposure to most game groups.
The Dice Tower – Reasonable priced exposure to a large group of gamers
KickTraq – Effective direct promotions to Kickstarter backers.
CasualGameRevolution.com – Magazine
 
PAID PROMOTIONS
Woobox – allows you to run contests that require LIKE or FOLLOW
Contest Domination – allows free contests for LIKEs
BGG Contest – Expensive for the amount of backers, but gets you traffic and hot list exposure.
Kickin’ It Games – They offer mailing list and social blasts to gamers for a reasonable price.
 
MARKETING YOUR CAMPAIGN

Reach out to other campaigns that might share a similar customer base and work out a deal to promote each other
Create a custom avatar for the campaign so others can use it to show support
Share your updates to other pages and groups on all the social networks
When your campaign is live direct people to the kickstarter page, not the Facebook or your publisher pages. Each click a potential customer has to make you lose 20% more ROI.
Add your campaign to Stumble Upon – http://www.stumbleupon.com/submit
Do an E-mail blast at start of campaign and again a week before it ends.
Do a Reddit IAMA (Ask Me Anything) event during your campaign.
An update is an excuse to market and a call to action. Make sure you use it as such with images and encourage people to come pledge or raise their pledge.
Spread out your updates. Don’t post more then one a day and 3 a week.
After the initial buzz dies down about your campaign, start to post review links, videos, and your designer blog. One a day at most, spread them out. These give you a great reason to get mentioned in site news and other blogs and promote your campaign.
On the last day of the campaign make sure the front page of your Kickstarter has a link to point back to your website. Once the campaign ends, you will not be able to update your Kickstarter front page.
MARKETING YOUR GAME
UPDATE 2018: I posted a poll on a game industry forum where retailers, publishers, and distributors could reply and got this great feedback when asking what they feel has influanced their sales/purchasing the most:

And when we gave the same poll to consumers (granted a biased group of online Facebook users) we see a shift in what they feel is most important:
 
REFERENCE &amp; MORE READING
What 40 board game creators did to build  their crowd before launching on Kickstarter.
Building an audience and mailing list for your tabletop gamehttps://medium.com/@fantastic.factories/building-an-audience-and-mailing-list-for-your-tabletop-game-57ffbfcf2c2e
Hacking Kickstarter’s “Popular” Algorithmhttp://prefundia.com/blog/hacking-kickstarters-popular-algorithm-how-to-become-most-popular/
http://crowdbooster.com/ – Facebook / Twitter Analytics
Advertising Tipshttp://www.gatekeepergaming.com/article-17-advertising-tips-stats/
Jamey Stegmaier – Kickstarter Lessons blogs:
Social NetworksBloggers, Podcasters, and ReviewersPaid Advertising &amp; How Backers Find your ProjectReddit10 Things I’ve Learned About Social Media
Tabletop Game Kickstarter Workshop:https://www.facebook.com/groups/630412297019422
Facebook ads fraud:http://youtu.be/oVfHeWTKjag
Facebook Marketing:http://www.jonloomer.com/
Jonathan H. Liu – Kickstarter Primers


Richard Bliss – Dive into Kickstarter videos



 
			
			
	
	
			

	
	
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mark A. on April 27, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            James,
Thanks for another gigantic treasure trove of information. Time to start building up that social media clan!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Wes Jones on April 28, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Another great post! This certainly took a long time, will definitely go in as a bookmarked page. Love the paid advertising section, great starting point and it will save me a lot of money and headache trying to figure out why one advertising isn’t working over another. Thank you for taking the time to do this! It goes a LONG way to those of us who are just starting out.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Martha on April 22, 2016
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            That’s a slick answer to a chnellaging question

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Alyson Warner on April 28, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Fantastic wealth of information here- Thank you!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Billy on May 9, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            It might be noteworthy to list if they cost money for reviews (Dice Tower, Undead). Also, Drive Thru does not do Kickstarter reviews.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Chandrakant Deshpande on May 13, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            To, Mr. James Mathe,
   I am Chandrakant Deshpande from India. I did contact you before regarding selling my board game to a USA based publisher. If I send you details about my board game and my project, will you inform me details about Kick starting my project, including project cost, my own investment needed, possibility of acquiring angel investment, etc.
   Regards,
 Chandrakant Deshpande,

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on May 13, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Chandrakant, I have a consulting company that does that at http://www.KickinItGames.com and there is a fee for it. Prices are on the website.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Emil Larsen on June 23, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Hi James, 
Thank you for a great blog – really cool to read all your pointers 🙂
I’m not that experienced in the Kickstarter field yet – but I’m starting to share my experience here, if you’re interested – feel free to take a look – http://www.suntzugames.com/kickstarter-study.html
Have a great day James and keep up the nice work, it’s inspiring! 
Best regards Emil, SunTzuGames

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Jeff King on December 9, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            I send a lot of people that I consult with this way, in fact I did another recommend last night. So I decided to pull up a few of the articles again for a refresher (always good stuff). As one of the hosts of All Us Geeks; I’d like to throw my hat in for the Kickstarter friendly review list. ;-}
We do a lot of Kickstarter related audio reviews on the podcast, game preview videos on our YouTube channel, and we have the stand alone segment The Game of Crowd Funding where we give projects owners a chance to discuss their projects along with lessons they’ve learned along the way.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Marcel on February 4, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            I just wanted to thank you for the wealth of information you are providing here. As someone who is thinking about running a Kickstarter campaign for my game, this is all extremely helpful! Looking forward to learning more from you.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Jayson Smith on March 18, 2019
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thank you, James for reposting the link to this list on one of the Facebook forums. It really is what I have been looking for. Your blogs are so vast, that it is getting hard to navigate through all of it. So, when I get directed right to the perfect information…its AWESOME! Thank you!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on March 25, 2019
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Remember I do have an INDEX post you can look at to help find things.

                        
                    
                    


                

	
		Leave a Reply Cancel reply			
				 

 
 
  oneall.api.plugins.social_login.build('oneall_social_login_providers_9063723', {
   'providers': ['facebook','twitter','google','linkedin'], 
   'callback_uri': (window.location.href + ((window.location.href.split('?')[1] ? '&amp;amp;': '?') + "oa_social_login_source=comments")), 
   'css_theme_uri': 'http://public.oneallcdn.com/css/api/socialize/themes/wordpress/default.css' 
  });
 Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * 
Email * 
Website 




      
  
  


CAPTCHA Code *


			
			
	


		
</body>
</html>
