<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>


</head>
<body style="background-color:white;">
Dead Men Tell No Tales
			

				Sep 26, 2014
						20 Comments					
								James Mathe
				
                    KICKSTARTER ADVICE                

									 add-ons, advertising, campaign manager, early birds, referrals 
				
				
			
			

			
				
 
Well I’m not dead yet, so I have a tale to tell… We recently completed our 14th Kickstarter campaign for Dead Men Tell No Tales (DMTNT) and we did some things differently this time. Our campaign was a huge success with nearly 1600 copies of the board game sold. Our funding curve was near as perfect as you can hope for. I would like to share with you all the lessons learned and insights from this recent campaign.

Topics:
CONVENTIONS
WHEN TO LAUNCH
EU FRIENDLY
KICKSTARTER EXCLUSIVES
ADD-ONs
NO PLEDGE MANAGER
TO BE FUNNY OR NOT?
THE $1 PLEDGE
REPEAT BACKERS
FEATURED CAMPAIGNS
KS REFERRALS
ADVERTISING
EARLY BIRDS
RETAILER REWARDS
 
CONVENTIONS
Often I hear that people want to launch with a big bang party at a convention. This is really not a good idea. You can certainly use a convention to help you push sales and awareness of your game, but people are not attending a convention to get excited about someone’s Kickstarter campaign that won’t deliver until many months in the future. People at conventions are of the: “I want to spend my money now and play with some cool stuff here!” attitude. Thus, they are unlikely to care much about your game or event and even less likely to put money on the table at the time.
Since your first few days are the most important, you need to be at your computer constantly. You can’t do that while at a convention. If you want to get bang for your buck out of a convention, you should attend one BEFORE or in the MIDDLE of your campaign. Running demos and doing marketing at a convention is a good idea, but only if you’re not paying a lot to attend. Before your Kickstarter starts you might want to print out a post card with a QR code pointing a bit.ly link to your Kickstarter page and hand those out.
An issue with the large conventions like GenCon or Origins is that they tend to suck up all the money before and after. I own 3 game stores and we typically see sales take a dip during this period as people are either saving for their trip to GenCon or they filled their credit cards while at GenCon. Attendees have seen so many new games that they can’t possibly buy them all and so they probably need to save up just to get some of them later. Thus, there has been a bit of a fear/concern about launching a KS campaign immediately after GenCon.
We launched DMTNT just days after GenCon. We put a note at the bottom of the campaign reminding backers they will not have to pay till the campaign is over. This seemed to work just fine and within the first two days we funded our game. Better still, we saw a very strong and steady stream of backers added every single day of the campaign. So I think it’s safe to say that post-GenCon is a valid time to launch your game. That is not to say that pre-GenCon is equally valid, I did not test that.
MORE READING: http://www.leagueofgamemakers.com/promoting-your-game-at-cons/
 
WHEN TO LAUNCH
More specifically the above begs the question of when to launch your campaign? I’ve heard a lot of chatter and miss-information about this and people ask me all the time, so let me give you my suggestions and theories.
You should launch on a Monday-Thursday. Why? Because people are busy with family and fun and outside stuff on Friday nights and Weekend. They are not sitting around their computers. Data I have for 2 years of TableTop Gaming category from Kicktraq.com shows that the most pledges happen on Thursday and the least happen on Saturday.
You should NOT launch on a holiday. Why? Because again people are with families or on vacation and not at their computers.
You should launch in the morning hours in the USA. Why? Because your first day or two is about building momentum and you want them to look like stellar sales days. So you want the day to be as long as possible. The morning in the USA is at least the evening in the EU so you will get their backing too. If you launched after work (evening) in the USA you’d miss out on many potential backers for your first day.
Don’t launch with a specific timed party event. Sure have your event/party but do so after your initial hours of the campaign. You will have a lot to do with answering questions and making quick fixes to the campaign and rewards and story to deal with. You don’t need the stress and distraction of some sort of live party at that time.  Also for what it’s worth, these launch “parties” are usually not well attended.
It really doesn’t matter which month you launch in. Every month has successful Kickstarters. You will not make or break your funding based on the month you launch unless your product is seasonal (which would be odd for the TableTop category). The only real concern to address is that you will have to pay taxes on the money collected so if you are thinking of launching late in the year make sure you talk to an accountant.
We launched DMTNT on a Tuesday morning and was funded in two days. We ended on a Thursday evening with a huge push and the biggest pledge day.
MORE READING:
Kickstarter Basics: When to Launch

http://indieconquest.com/2014/02/09/when-is-the-best-time-to-launch-a-kickstarter/
http://gotgeniusgames.com/kickstarter-stats-101-does-the-month-i-launch-matter/
Google Doc of upcoming launch dates:https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1eo1zHVhxJ-KuYmD7rwYhqyt748DMtvVJyM5WdWhcExc/edit#gid=7
EUROPEAN UNION (EU) FRIENDLY
There is a new trend on KS to offer EU friendly campaigns and put a seal up that proudly announces that fact. What it basically means is that you’re offering a greater discount to shipping (or found some creative way to fulfill) to backers in the EU.
A lot depends on the type of game you have to deliver, but I’ve tried several times with larger board games to crack this nut. Three times I’ve had my China order split and had someone (two different companies) in EU handle the shipping. It’s a logistics headache and people make mistakes in the process. You have to pay extra for two ocean freight shipments (more than just 1 shipment to the USA). You have to pay import fees and for trucking to the EU warehouse which they then charge you VAT (Value Added Tax which is 19%). You must pay someone to actually handle the packing and shipping and the materials (USPS offers free boxes) to do so (plus VAT again). Typical shipping from and to a destination in the EU for a board game was about 15 EURO which is about $21 USD. If that’s all you paid, it would make sense to offer cheap shipping to the EU KS backers. But, don’t forget you will also need to pay that company that packed your game and that is typically about 3 EUROs per backer. They will need to buy boxes and packing materials as well. Hey, that’s not even the end of it. You must also pay for storage and to send any of your extra inventory back to the USA (plus VAT again too).
When we ran final numbers for our last couple of board games handled this way, we found we were paying about $30-45 per package to get them delivered. While we only pay about $10-12 to deliver to backers in the USA. We charged our backers an EU friendly $15 extra for shipping – well that left us eating $15-18 per game above what we covered for US bakers. That’s all the profit margin there was in the game – so we did all this work and made no money on the games. Plus, we had tons of hassles and delays dealing with all the logistics. Why should we be subsidizing the EU customers more than our other customers and then making no money?
Because Minion Games is sold in world wide distribution, we figured we can live with the loss of a few EU backers as they could pick up the game at their local stores later. So instead of our usual $15 EU friendly shipping rate, we decided to charge the actual shipping and not take a big hit. The average shipping to the EU for DMTNT was going to be about $45 and if you take off a $12 credit that’s $33.00 for shipping to the EU. Of course we got some complaints about that. We made a very nice chart on the page with the exact figures from USPS and that really kept the public complaining to a very minimal amount. We also offered a 3 game bundle which helped offset the shipping as they would all fit in a large flat rate box.
What did we find out? Well a typical board game that we make (from our past campaigns) tended to get about 10-15% EU backers. What we found out with DMTNT is that we still got 5% EU backers. That means we lost only about 10% of the EU backers (less than 1% of total funding) – a small loss to take to not have to deal with the whole EU Friendly headaches and low/no profit. Again, I want to state that we’re in world-wide distribution and don’t need the EU backers on KS to make our funding goal – but some of you people new to publishing may still have to offer an EU friendly option to get your games made.
MORE READING: http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-lesson-47-this-project-is-eu-friendly/
 
 
KICKSTARTER EXCLUSIVES
People say that Kickstarter is all about the exclusives and special rewards. While these are surely valid “gimmicks” to help you get funded, they are not always required. Again, if you’re running your first campaign you may need to use all the tricks at your disposal.
For DMTNT we ran the campaign for 3 out of the 4 weeks without anything exclusive to Kickstarter. When we did finally add an exclusive, it was a simple card. We can use it to get ads paid for on BoardGameGeek.com or hand out at conventions. The lack of any exclusives was mentioned once or twice and we were asked a few times in PM if all the items on the stretch goals would be in the retail version. While obviously a few people only back projects on KS if they get something exclusive it never really became an issue in the campaign. It certainly didn’t play any major role in our bottom line. It’s also fair to note that there are a few people who dislike exclusive content and won’t back if you have it. So I think overall this was a non issue.
My advice? Offer exclusives only if you’re really needing to do so to help your funding of a stretch goal. I wouldn’t offer the exclusives in the main campaign.
MORE READING: http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-faceoff-1-exclusive-content/
http://www.reddit.com/r/boardgames/comments/1weld0/in_general_how_do_you_feel_about_kickstarter/
 
 
ADD-ONs
Add-ons are basically other things you can buy to help bump up the backer’s funding amount. If you’re having a hard time getting NEW backers to your campaign, this is a good way to get existing backers to pony up more money. It works very well when they are trying to reach the next stretch goal. Do not go overboard – remember what you’re really here to sell. If someone comes to your page and sees all these trinkets and t-shirts and other crap, they will be turned off. I recommend adding most of your add-ons after the first week so that your campaign is clean and clear in the first week. This also helps keep down the number of options one has to think about before pressing that PLEDGE NOW button – let them think about that later.
Add-ons can be a real pain in the butt (and your budget)! Many times people have forgotten about the hassles of getting the extra item made and to ship it – sometimes you can’t just stick it in the same box like a poster or an art print. Don’t forget if you add a bunch of add-ons, you’re going to be hand picking every single order and you’ll be needing the help of a pledge manager for that. Better to keep things limited to only a few items. Try adding value to the game itself with items like card sleeves and other game bit upgrades.
KS says you’re not supposed to sell existing products, but they tend to look the other way when it comes to just selling your back catalog with your current Kickstarter. This is a great way to help with the funding as it’s sales of your past games that you got on the cheap already.
STRETCH GOALS: On a side note, I also think it’s very important to keep your page clear of overly distracting amounts of stretch goals. You should show just one or two ahead of the current funding. This allows you to adjust your levels on the fly based on current funding. It also keeps the page less confusing.
Remember that if you charge $25 for an add-on, while that gets you closer to your total funding goal, maybe only $10 profit is added to your usable budget. Forget about T-shirts and art prints and posters. They don’t sell well and are a pain. For DMTNT we are happy we added no add-ons as now we can ship our stuff assembly line style.
MORE READING: http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-lesson-14-the-value-of-add-ons/
 
 
KISS – NO PLEDGE MANAGER
As stated above, we decided this time around not to offer any add-ons. While this limits your overall total earnings potential, it does keep the money you earned going to the actual game. This has the added advantage of not having to make use of a pledge manager. We’ve used Backerkit several times in the past. On our earlier campaigns it was helpful and made a lot of extra sales. On our more recent (coin) campaigns it utterly failed us and made things worse. These sites can usually pay for themselves by making you extra sales, but you have to decide if that’s worth the issues that they can cause. Some backers hate 3rd party pledge managers and will not share their info with them.
So you don’t need a PM if you can keep your campaign simple. If you do decide to offer a lot of add-ons, you’d best make use of a pledge manager as it will reduce the overall problems you have.
Here are a few good Pledge Managers I know of:
Backerkit – A bit expensive and complicated to use, but very powerful.  $149-299 Setup fee. Couple payment plans, but roughly 1% of the campaign plus 3% of added funds using Backerkit’s cart.
FundAFull – $250 min or 1% fee. 2.9%+30 cent additional funds processing fee. Pledge Calculator.
Skykadia – $300 min or 1% fee.
ShopStarter – 2.1% (+2.9% + 30 cents) of add-ons
 
 
TO BE FUNNY OR NOT?
Your primary campaign video should be short and to the point. It does not need to explain how to play the game, but rather to express what the game is about and what backers can expect from you. You should include a how to play video in your main (story) page text. Your video should be 3 minutes or less and in the first 30 seconds get to the point of what it is you’re trying to sell. We got a very good play through rate of 47%.
We paid good money to make a really nice and funny video for DMTNT. I feel this really helped us out and was worth it. It gave us reasons to talk about the campaign and helped others find reason to share the video. A good laugh should help loosen one’s purse strings but humor can be subjective, so make sure everyone thinks you’re being funny, not just your friends. A good video can cost $300-1000 – so be careful to spend only what you can afford to loose.
 

 
 
THE $1 PLEDGE
Anyone on KS can back any project for $1 without a reward level added. But most people don’t know this so it’s good idea to have one there so that people can follow your campaign and use the comments section. Also, many times people will not cancel their $1 reward and you’ll make a few extra bucks from people just showing their support.
In DMTNT we had a Print &amp; Play reward set to $5. We figured anyone who would like to use the backing just to pay attention to the campaign would do so at the $5 level. I think we were wrong. We ended up getting 33 $1 pledges (that didn’t cancel). Only the people who know how to do that were able to do so. So I recommend that every single campaign should have a $1 pledge. It never hurts and it’s always helpful and can even net you a few more bucks.
MORE READING: http://makezine.com/2013/07/30/demystifying-the-1-kickstarter-pledge/
 
REPEAT BACKERS
In most of our campaigns we get a reasonable amount of repeat backers. I’d say about 20-25% of our previous backers join us on new campaigns. Of course it depends if the new campaign has any common ground with the old campaign.
Minion Games had not run a campaign for about 9 months before DMTNT. So there was bound to be some turn over of the user base at KS. But we were totally shocked when we went to do a mailing list merge and found that out of 1747 backers, we had 1605 new backers and only 142 repeat backers. Of course this is not 100% accurate as many people change their email addresses. I would guess it’s safe to say only about 10% of our DMTNT backers were repeat backers, which is way lower then I expected.
Why the drop? Well this was a lighter game and cooperative and we usually do heavier games and accessories. So maybe we really did reach out to a new audience. KS has come a long way in the last year with many high profile campaigns bringing in many new backers. There are a fair amount of people that are just tired of KS and waiting on previous rewards. The final reason that might have had some impact was that our last coins campaign fulfillment did not go smoothly and we may have lost some regulars.
I’m not sure I can make any grand statements here other than to share my experience. Maybe our next campaign which is for a light game as well will shed some light on this subject.

 
This chart shows number of total and repeat Kickstarter crowdfunding project backers as of July 2014. As of that month, more than 6.56 million people had pledged their monetary support towards any of the 157,826 launched Kickstarter projects. Almost 1.96 million people had backed more than one project on the crowdfunding site.
SOURCE: http://www.statista.com/statistics/288345/number-of-total-and-repeat-kickstarter-project-backers/
 
 
FEATURED CAMPAIGNS
We were lucky and got placement on the coveted “Featured project in Games” for the Games category. Yet it resulted on only 13 backers. Now granted it was a Saturday, a Holiday Weekend, and during Dragon*Con – but still very little reward for being there. I think KS has changed so much that being featured doesn’t really matter that much anymore. It certainly is not going to be a deciding factor in your meeting your funding goal or not.
There is no reason to chase this rabbit down the hole…
 
 
KS REFERRALS

UPDATE: Kickstarter added google analytics at the end of April 2015 which really help track referrals. A good primer was posted here: http://www.spellforgegames.com/kickstarter-and-google-analytics-a-guide-for-kickstarter-campaigns/
Survey Says? Once again I monitored my referrals page closely throughout the campaign. Yet once again, I saw referral data changing to push people into the Kickstarter owned categories. I covered this in a previous blog post, but in short, you can’t wholly trust this referral page.
In fact I surveyed my backers to find more details about where they heard about DMTNT and it’s interesting to see the difference from what Kickstarter is telling you earned you backers and what the backers are actually claiming…

The fist column (Kickstarter Browsing) is a bit misleading as many backers who believe they first heard of our project on Kickstarter selected this answer as a default. If you add up the Browsing + Notice + Featured columns they pretty much match up with the total KS is claiming they have contributed to this campaign. I guess my question was too granular in this case. So, these numbers actually match.
The second column (Direct Traffic) is a bit odd even if you take into account the Other Sites difference. What it’s saying to me is that KS has attributed a lot more sales to direct traffic then I can account for from my mailing list. Direct traffic is basically any sources that don’t have a referral site passed through.
The BGG Ad column is an interesting one as it’s stating that MANY more backers (over 100 more) say they found out about DMTNT through an advertisement on BoardGameGeek.com – this would mean that the ads were probably double as effective as we thought. The BGG Forums column is also understated. The survey told us that about 230 people found out about us on BGG – yet Kickstarter only reported 96.  Kickstarter has basically cut the referrals from BGG to less than half the actual amount. In light of this, I think our ads there were more effective then we thought in the past (see next section).
Another oddity is that Google+ was over stated in Kickstarter, though maybe that’s because I assume that all Google traffic should be attributed to Plus. More likely Kickstarter is counting anyone landing on the site through even a Google search. I know people are lazy when they want to find something on the Internet and many just type whatever into Google to get the Kickstarter page right away. Obviously the survey shows that Google was not really responsible for many backers. Those that reported they discovered our project through Google meant Google+
Facebook referrals seem to more or less match what the survey says they should be.
Again, not a surprise, that Kicktraq.com referrals are less than half what the survey says. But that kind of does make a pattern – allowing one to assume that your true Kicktraq and BGG referrals are double what Kickstarter states they are.
Reddit referrals are understated by KS but by a bit less than the others. I did notice during the campaign that referrals attributed to Reddit one day would sometimes disappear the next. Again, see my post regarding how KS handles referrals. But I saw this happen two times live.
Dice Tower probably got hit the hardest on this referral list. KS only gave them credit for 7 backers, yet I have over 50 reporting that’s where they first heard about DMTNT. Either people think all news they learn comes from Dice Tower, or more realistically the Dice Tower crowd tends to surf around KS a bit more before pulling the trigger and backing.
A Friend column stating someone heard about our campaign from a friend is hard to classify as they could be attributed to several categories, but most likely they fell into the Direct traffic or Goggle search. Helps account for some of the oddness there.
The conclusion is, once again, you can not trust the Referral page from Kickstarter. Most large sites that help feed sales at Kickstarter are consistently being under reported by half!

 
ADVERTISING
Yet again I waited till our second week to start my banner and site ads. This allowed me to make sure that most of the backers I earned on my own (mailing list, followers, etc) were already credited to the campaign. This time we paid $10-75 to get some placements on several blogger sites. We also paid a large amount of money (well actually earnings from previous promo cards) to BoardGameGeek.com – BGG has a store front that they use to sell items like your stretch goals that are not included in the base box. In return they give you advertising credit.
We monitored our BGG referrals on KS (as we have little way to track ROI other than this faulty tool) and we had 28 backers from our own posts in the forums. We started to run some ads for 3 weeks and saw that number raise to 63 (some organic and some from ads no doubt). Then on the last day of the campaign we had a STATIC banner on the front page of BGG. Between that and all those backers who were waiting for the last day to pledge, the BGG referral number jumped to 96.
As stated in the previous referral section, my best guess is these numbers reported by Kickstarter are half of their true values.
According to our survey, 28% of our backers said they at least saw a online banner about the campaign.  10% were unsure if they did.
So, yes BGG plays an important role in a campaign’s success. I have stated in previous posts that my best guess is that BoardGameGeek.com spending basically paid for itself and nothing more. Doing the detailed survey and comparing with the referrals reported though, I now think we can actually attribute twice as many backers to BGG then we have in the past.
We spent $700 on ads at BGG. We figure this brought us about 200 backers and roughly $2800 in profit to the campaign. Keep in mind this was a game very much geared toward the general populous of BGG.
We spent $125 on The Dice Tower ad and had some coverage in their news. As the survey and the referral information are drastically different, I have to assume the actual ads referrals were somewhere in between. If someone clicks on the banner it would account for it in the KS referral page, but if someone just searched for us after hearing it on the podcast, that would not. But we only paid for the banner. So if we double the referrals like we see see we can do from the other site referrals, that means we got about 14 backers from our ads. That’s close to $200 profit which means this ad at least paid for itself.
Would we advertise with BGG again? Yes, because our promos pay the bills there. 🙂 Would we spend more hard cash on doing so? Probably. It seems that it’s worth it when you take the above referral extrapolation into account. Is our experience the same as others? Some, but not all. Jamey Stegmaier (another heavy writer about KS) claims he gets multiple times return on his investments there. Some others have said (as I have in the past) it’s a break even case. But I think it’s better then what I’ve given them credit for in the past.
FACEBOOK: We spent about $50 on boosting our posts on Facebook. These were restricted to the USA mostly. If you boost or pay for ads on Facebook you MUST restrict to a country or two or you’ll get a lot of fake traffic (esp from China).
VIDEO REVIEWS/PREVIEWS: We spent some money on a video preview from DriveThurReviews. With that comes access to his channel which brought us at least 10 confirmed backers. We can’t work out a ROI on this as a preview is essential to every KS campaign.  We got UndeadViking to give our game a quick review which we paid only shipping/POD costs for him to do. We got at least a dozen backers from that as well. Overall I would have expected more people to say they heard about us through these sources, but the truth is they probably played a much more major role in getting people to click the final PLEDGE NOW button then any other marketing source. So worth the money spent for sure.
NEWS/BLOG SITES: The other news and blog sites we paid $10-65 to each for some ads. We did 7 of them. They might fall into the Other Sites categories but none of the survey results showed them as initial sources for our campaign. They are pretty cheap to get some amount of exposure and this is the second time I’ve tossed them some money. But overall I don’t think we got much of a return on these. This amounts to pretty much just $200 spent on branding and not sales in this case.
We’ve learned that BGG is a solid place to spend advertising money. Still, given these new facts, BGG only brought us at most 12% of our backers, and they were the largest outside source. It’s clear to me that you can’t count on a few ads making your campaign a success. You really need to get out there and grind the social networks and demo your game in public and all the other things you need to bring your own backers to the project.
UPDATE: I tried Twitter ads on another campaign and it was a complete drain of money for 0 gain. Worse if you’re not careful it can suck a lot of money quickly – I ran an add for less than 24 hours yet it cost $70 and got me no return. Reminds me of the uselessness of AdWords on Google. I would avoid using Twitter ads.
MORE READING: http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-lesson-26-paid-advertising-and-how-backers-find-your-project/
 
 
EARLY BIRDS
We see many campaigns with “Early Bird” reward levels. Sometimes with huge discounts. So people seem to think they are normal or somehow required when they are not. First of all, we have a following and have produced games before, so we don’t need to bribe our customers to back us. Second, these rewards tend to leave a bad taste in the mouths of backers who missed out. Many of them won’t even back once they have missed out. Third, it artificially locks someone into this reward level and your chances of getting them to upgrade to a more expensive reward becomes very remote.
Early Bird rewards might encourage a few early pledges but it discourages late pledges for a much longer period of time. The greater the discount the more discouraging. A better solution would be to offer a limited number of special edition copies of your game (at a higher price).
If you are just starting out and have had a hard time drumming up support before your launch day, then you might consider Early Bird rewards. But if you must, please make sure they are not more than a $5 discount. It is also much better to cut them off on a specific date (2nd or 3rd day) instead of a specific quantity. This allows the people who want to help with your launch the chance to do so without missing out.
Minion Games does not play this early bird game and neither should you.
MORE READING:http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-lesson-62-early-bird-pledge-levels/
“In summary, 59.2% of people dislike early birds and only 11.8% of people like them.”
The Current State of Early Birds and KS Exclusives (2017)

ALSO UNDER MARKETING HEADING:
http://www.jamesmathe.com/survey-says-ks-usage/
 
 
RETAILER REWARDS
We typically offered retailer rewards in our past campaigns. Retailers expect 50% off, a multiple of all the stretch goals, and free shipping. They should get it too- why should they take a chance on you and have their money sitting in your pocket not working for them for so long? You should consider requiring 5 or maybe even as much as 10 copies as a retailer level.
Anyway, in the past we’ve had at least half of our “retailer” support levels bought by “stores” overseas. It’s hard to verify these stores are really stores- many of them are not. We use Google maps to find their address and street view to look for their signs but it doesn’t always work. These foreign orders at low profit tend to be more hassle then they are worth. You make very little money and do lots of work and could loose a lot of money on shipping. So if you do offer retailer levels, I advise that you do so for USA (or whatever country you live in) retailers only.
I have had some people complain about a retailer level though as they think that anyone supporting a Kickstarter should support it fully the way they are. For this reason I didn’t initially put a retailer level in DMTNT. But during the last week after having being asked by 4 or 5 retailers by that time, I went ahead and added one. No complaints.
Retailer levels can bring more funds to your campaign, but at a severely reduced profit margin which could mess up your plans. You should avoid foreign retailers.
 
 
MORE READING:
http://stonemaiergames.com/kickstarter-lesson-48-its-okay-to-say-no/
http://stonemaiergames.com/the-top-6-things-you-really-need-to-know/

 
			
			
	
	
			

	
	
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									GAME-O-GAMI on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Dead men apparently tell long, detail-rich tales. Thank you.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Patrick on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Hi James!
One way to get better referral data is to have a few dozen redirect curls on your site. Use one url per channel and Google analytics will let you see the referral data to each url. After the campaign just edit them to point to your main site to pick up tail traffic

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            It’s not a matter of finding the referral source of all traffic. It’s a matter of finding the sources for those the actually backed. This data is not possible to get through outside sources or urls like you suggest. I know how many people clicked on the BGG banners. That however doesn’t tell me how many people bought our game from that original source (the ROI).

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Joe Morrissey on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            This is a very strange article for me to read right now. I’m in the middle of my second week of my Kickstarter campaign and everything you’re saying, I’m currently living. This advice is “dead” on… and I’m not just saying that because I pretty much decided to do everything James wrote above.
One thing I will say for ‘new people’ starting out and trying to get backers that helped us is we gave away a print and play of the game. We were going to have it at a $5 level, but when I did the research on how much we’d actually make versus what it could potentially bring in. We’re a new company. No one has heard of us. It just made since to give it away. 
To get people to pledge at all, we offer the full PnP with all the stretch goals for just a $1. We’ve gotten a lot of great press and comments about it. I’ve also seen a decent amount people (around 20) upgrade from the $1 to the full version of the game or higher. 
We believed that giving it away showed our potential backers that we didn’t need to hide our game behind a pledge level. We believed it was a fun game and to prove it we gave it to them. We put it out there and are getting a lot of positive feedback from people saying they downloaded it and enjoyed it and backed it. I don’t have the numbers to say that this helped encourage others to either upgrade or pledge, but I don’t think it hurt. Something to think about.
Either way, great article as always, James. Thank you.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            It’s also important to note that 99% of the PnP copies will never get printed. So it’s not a big deal to give it away. In fact we’ll be giving our PnP of our next campaign (DragonFlame in Nov’14) away as soon as someone pledges anything at all. Immediately. They can still cancel their pledge and walk away. But we want to get them to take the first step.
I’m not a big fan in the totally free method as people just download things for free and never touch them – cause well it was free. I prefer to retain some value in the thing we’re giving them. Also we do sell our PnP files on RPGNow.com for years after our release and while they (all combined) only make a few hundred bucks a month for us – it is steady income for no work.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Joe Morrissey on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            That was a concern I realized after we gave them away. I was thinking of putting them up on DriveThruCards or something along those lines. Since it’s free now, not sure if people will actually want to pay for them. The value of the DriveThruCards is you get actual cards at a reduced price, so I guess there’s that. I like the idea of saying, “once we’ve hit X, we’ll release the PnP.”

                        
                    
                    


                


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Steven Cole on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thanks for the great article, James. I am in the middle of a campaign right now and trying to determine if spending money on advertising will save it or just be a waste of money. I appreciate your detailed analysis. 
Steve.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Thane Morgan on January 13, 2015
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            It is really hard to judge banner ads. click through traffic is not a great measure of effectiveness; people might look it up later after chasing their current threads on the web. It reinforces awareness in ways that are pretty much unmeasurable; they see it in multiple places, they are reminded several times in a day. It is why big brands keep advertising even though everyone already knows about them. It may lend credence to the idea you are taking your campaign seriously. And of course, it does show some support for the community you are advertising with.
That said, so far I have not been impressed with the return on BGG ads. I’m not quite to the point of regretting the money spent, but when I consider my own online habits, I may have clicked on a banner ad once intentionally in the past year. It is also early in my campaign, and I’m regretting the stuff I am only learning now, so take it with a grain of salt.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 13, 2015
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            A lot can also depend on the quality of the ad itself as well as the product it links to. No offense meant, but your game board and KS page are extremely hard to look at with harsh colors and abstractness. That’s going to prevent people from pushing the pledge button as well.

                        
                    
                    


                


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Joe Morrissey on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Okay, I’m not stalking James, I promise. I had posted the comment below on the Kickstarter Best Practices Facebook group and he asked me to post it here. I recently launched and successfully funded my Kickstarter in less than a day, which is odd right? Because you likely have no idea who I am, right? Well, here’s what I did. Hope it helps you guys.
– That FB group helped me out a lot, not just before I launched with my page, but over the past year and a half that I was seriously looking at doing a KS. I don’t think I got any backers from this page directly, but they all helped make the page great for others to back. 
– I became a part of a gaming community. Having just moved to Washington, I knew no one here. Thankfully, the Seattle area is full of gamers. Still it was a lot of nights leaving my house and going to open game nights to play games with people and get to know them. Sometimes we played Vye (my game), but not always. Mainly it was just about showing them that I was a person who loved games and if they liked me, great, but I didn’t try to ‘pitch’ them my game. However, many of those people were excited for me to launch and have gone out of their way to help spread the word and back high. 
– I also went into local game stores and asked them to carry the GameCrafter version of my game in their ‘loaner library’, which really turned into a, ‘is this a game I’d want to carry in my store’ interview on the part of the store owner. Very useful, if not a direct way to learn if your game holds water and if not why. From those meetings, I made a handful of connections, which led to twitter posts which lead to interviews, which lead to press, which let to backers. But before I got those backers, I had to walk into a store, show the owner my game and listen to his feedback and learn from it. 
– Lastly, I created a “Day 1 Backer Promise” list and put it up anywhere I could on my Game’s Facebook Page and Twitter Account, and in Emails – everywhere. I got around 80 or so people to agree to have me either call or email them the moment I hit launch. I was talking to Facebook friends I hadn’t seen in decades 15 minutes after I hit Launch telling them that I had gone live with the KS and they should jump on and back it. It worked! We were half way funded in three hours. In 19 hours we had reached our goal. 
– All that aside, other things helped as well. We only asked for 9k, we offered our game for $20 and the game has amazing art. All of that helped drive sales. 
So, this a long winded way of saying you can be a nobody and get funded quickly, but it takes time, a lot of uncomfortable conversations, a crap ton of work, and some great art. Good luck!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on September 27, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thanks for sharing. I try to keep in mind the people who are first-timers when I write my articles. Glad to hear your story.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Patrick Aquilone on September 28, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            This article is a TON of help and great advice.  Thanks!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									I on September 28, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            People routinely misreport where from they heard of a campaign. In numerous campaigns we surveyed people, asking them exactly that. Among the options was “An ad on BGG”. Around 10% of respondents would routinely select that. 
Thing is… we didn’t run BGG ads on those campaigns.
Our most successful campaign had no ads whatsoever.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Denis on October 1, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            James, it is very interesting for me to know, what positions have you taken on BGG for $700? It seems that these were some minor banners shown somewhere + 1-day exposure (it is $400, as I know). Is my guess right?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on October 1, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Yeah we had 2 weeks of top and side banners and one day of static top banner on BGG.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									C on October 2, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            In lieu of EB discounts, some creators (eg. Reaper, Dwarven Forge (?) and Zealot Miniatures) are offering Early Bird Shipping — whoever signs up first, goes first in the shipping queue (within reason). Works for me!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Chuck Whelon on November 14, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Great read. I’m just about to do a Kickstarter for a new Pewfell book. Printing and shipping shouldn’t be a problem, but I think you’ve convinced me to hold off on the add-ons and somewhat reduce the variety of the pledge levels, at the start at least. Thanks for taking the time to write this all up, James!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Diego on June 17, 2015
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Great article, thank you for writting it.
I dislike the “avoid foreign retailers” part (been one myself) but understand your point, so I propose a solution:
Could creators make a list of real store they have work with in the past? That would solve the problem of people trying to past as stores just to make profit reselling games. Also, we could track diferents needs for each country so the creators could decide if they can work with a particular country.
For example, here in Peru you should never send a package without a tracking number. If you do and it doesnt show up, there ir no way for the reciver to claim it. With that info the creator could decide if they are interested in taking or covering this kind of risk.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									bill lasek on June 28, 2016
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Hey James,
I am a bit late it appears to stumble on your blog but I am blown away by your level of detail. For a new creator like myself whom is going through the process of “hey I have a fun prototype my friends like” to “hey this can become a real thing either through KS or producers”. Articles like this are so very valuable and helpful. Especially of interest to me was your take on the marketing side which especially for new creators I think is the most important one (well after make a unique fun game).
Thanks so much for putting this together it really is very well done and incredibly appreciated.
Regards,
Bill Lasek

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on June 28, 2016
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thanks for your comments. Please share my blog with others! And don’t forget to join our Facebook groups.

                        
                    
                    


                

	
		Leave a Reply Cancel reply			
				 

 
 
  oneall.api.plugins.social_login.build('oneall_social_login_providers_3015579', {
   'providers': ['facebook','twitter','google','linkedin'], 
   'callback_uri': (window.location.href + ((window.location.href.split('?')[1] ? '&amp;amp;': '?') + "oa_social_login_source=comments")), 
   'css_theme_uri': 'http://public.oneallcdn.com/css/api/socialize/themes/wordpress/default.css' 
  });
 Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * 
Email * 
Website 




      
  
  


CAPTCHA Code *


			
			
	


		
</body>
</html>
