<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>


</head>
<body style="background-color:white;">
10,000 Feet to Publishing a Board Game
			

				Jan 19, 2013
						30 Comments					
								James Mathe
				
                    GAME PUBLISHING                

				
				
			
			

			
				An audio interpretation by Andrew Voigt.

 
So you want to start a board game company? I could go into a page of details of each of these bullet points below (and maybe I will in the future), but for now I wanted to just take the 10,000 foot view of what it takes to make a hobby board game these days. I have done this now for over 14 games. This process can take 1 year to complete. Printers take 60-90 days and overseas shipping takes 21-30 days.
Accept or Create a game design
Typical contract to a designer is 3-5% of MSRP. 5-6% of Wholesale. 20-25% of Net Profit.
Some publishers pay a signing bonus but not many.
There should be a clause to get the game to market within 2 years

Develop &amp; Streamline that design
Get outside help to polish the game
Remove excess rules or those that break rules where possible
Remove fiddly bits or sub-games
Try to attend a Protospiel event to get good feedback from other designers

Blind Test the game
Have people you don’t know play the game without your help

Hire an artist
This will only be the raw art, a Layout designer will plug into the game design
Box cover $100-500
Game board $100-300
Cards $25-50 per low detail, $50-100 for larger art.
Everything needs to be done in 300dpi &amp; CYMK color.
Use resources like Elfwood and Deviant Art to find artists.
GMG Artist List

Hire a manual editor / writer
Designers can’t write manuals. Get a professional to help.
Here’s a great article about rules writing by Seth Jaffee.

Hire a Layout / Manual designer
Manuals are printed any size but in 4-page counts.
100-150 gsm, 4/4 color, CYMK
To make your artwork pop
To make icons and rules clear
Costs around $500-2000

What goes on the box?
Game Logo/Title
UPC code and SKU
Choaking Hazard warning
Age Range
Number of Players
Play Time
Your Logo
Your Company Copyright
Made in Country (optional)
The CE compliance logo
Your contact address for the CE if you have an EU partner.
I would NOT put the price on the box. Some companies like B&amp;N make you so you have to include the +5 barcode, but I’d avoid it if not forced.

Producer and Project Manager
Someone to organize all the staff, manage the logistics, and keep people on task
Most likely this will be you. Get some tools to help you.

Create components spec sheet
Printers will want to know thickness and finishes on all bits
Cards are typically 275-310 gsm of CARD STOCK (a multilayer stock)
Boards/Tokens are typically 1mm-2mm thick with a Linen finish
Wood bits are typically around 8-20mm in size.

Get bids from printers (see my RFQ post)
Every die you make for tokens is going to have a $300 setup cost, try to share 1 die.
For a plastic figure you need to pay for a mold which is $3000-5000 setup fee.
Custom dice are expensive and unless you’re doing 2000+ ganes, they are usually not worth the costs, try stamped or stickers
Card sizes – EURO: 59x91mm, 44x67mm – USA: 63x88mm, 57x87mm
Don’t forget extra zip lock bags and the e form to hold stuff from moving.
Don’t get talked into printing more than 1500-2500 copies.
Player boards will warp if printed on only one side, always worth the extra cost to do both.
Watch out for short cuts, humidity problems, just poor quality control from China
Ludo Fact in Germany does good work. Here is a video of them.
PandaGM.com is out of Canada and overseas a China printer for high quality
Do not pay for safety testing from the printer as it’s just a racket to rip you off. Most games do not need this, but if you are targeting under age 13 you may have to.

Set your Manufacturer’s Suggested Retail Price
A simple formula is to take your total printing+shipping+fees and divide by the # of games and multiple by 5 or 6 to get the MSRP.
Simple 1 deck card game should be $9-19
Light family or casual or party games should be around $20-39
Typical 3 pound 12”x12” board game has a value of about $50-60
Big box or heavy components games can go as high as $99

Setup a Kickstarter campaign page with rewards &amp; stretch goals
As a publisher there is never a reason NOT to run a kickstarter campaign – so do it.
Setup your Amazon Payment Stripe account right away, don’t wait. Even though the KS site says you’ll get your money 2 weeks after your campaign, it’s actually delivered the night the campaign ends.
Setup 80% of your Kickstarter page and submit it for review. You can update it more later
Make sure you have a $20-$30 item to buy as that’s the most popular buy-in
Make a video even if it’s just a simple iPhone introduction. Keep it short &lt; 3 min.
Run your campaign for about 30 days not much longer. Start and end dates should be chosen based on typical employer pay days.
Stretch goals should contain upgrades to bits or special cards but no new rules. They should not be required to play.
People will pay $10-20 extra for signed copies. They will pay $25-50 extra for the ability to add content to the game in some form.
Good a la carte items are pins and t-shirts.

Market &amp; Manage Kickstarter campaign
Social networking and having a base readership BEFORE your campaign starts
Post updates regularly (1-3 times a week)
Run contests to give things away and draw attention to your KS page
Add yourself to the KS announcement thread on BoardGameGeek.com.
Get interviewed on websites and podcasts
Get a review of the game done, if possible by a third party

Pay Down Payment of 50% plus setup fees
You’ll need to wire the fees to the printer. Your bank with charge you $20-40 for this.

Build any 3D objects for the printer
Hire a sculptor ($300-500)
Create water-tight 3D model

Build Mechanical Files for the printer
Mechanicals are the files with bleed and all items positioned on a die with die lines, etc.
Sounds easy but it’s a bit of a pain. Most require 3mm bleed around everything and some tokens will require 5 or 6mm. The box cover and main game board will probably require a 10mm wrap-around bleed.
Make sure the back cover has a UPC (you can buy them for cheap online), Age range, Play Time, a choking hazard warning, and NO PRICE. Put an E symbol on the box if you want to sell in Europe. If you make a game for kids under 13, you’ve got a lot of other hassles to deal with from the child protection laws recently passed.

Solicit product to distribution &amp; retailers
You’ll get 40% of MSRP if you sell direct to a distributor and they will want free shipping
You’ll get 34% of MSRP if you sell through a fulfillment house and are listed in many distributors
Direct sales to retailers will be at 50% of MSRP and free shipping.
Gamesalute.com also offers some solutions for those only wanting to print 1 game.
Using a fulfillment company like ImpressionsADV.net or PubServInc.com is highly recommended

Get “white box” sample from printerDetails all components and physical materials so you know what you’re getting
Mailing will usually be a Fedex box and cost $100-300 for this. It’s worth it.

Pay final printing and shipping bill
The printer will not ship until you do.

Arrange shipment / customs to warehouse
Shipping overseas is by volume and will cost you about $3000-4500
Once in the USA you need someone to deliver the product, most printers will help you but it might cost you a few hundred more as could customs fees.
Storage at a warehouse can be free or up to $15 a month for a pallet. About 300-600 games fit on a pallet. If you have no warehouse be prepared to fill your garage, hallways, basement, and more.

Ship out Kickstarter copies and add -ons
This will probably take you a week to get done, be prepared by ordering boxes ahead of time
Remember all those add-on a la carte menu things you offered – you’ll regret that now!

Sell to Distributors
If you don’t have a fulfillment company working for you, you need to contact distributors yourself. ACD, Alliance, GTS are some of the larger US ones. Esdevium Games and Brave New World are big in the EU. Lion Rampant in Canada.
http://www.impressionsadv.net/index.php?p=distributorlist

Accounting
Don’t think the fun is over, you still have to make all the royalty and tax payments
Invoice and collect from distributors (typically net 30 and 60% off MSRP)
Invoice and collect from any direct sales to retailers (typically net 30 and 50% off MSRP)

Continue marketing and convention support
Create a webpage to promote and direct sell the game (only at MSRP).
Give out review copies to podcasts and video reviewers
Post and run banners on BoardGameGeek.com
GAMA Trade Show (Spring – Las Vegas) : Show for meeting retailers
Origins (Early Summer – Columbus) : Good show to demo at. Hookup with the CABs there
GENCON (Late Summer – Indianapolis) : Biggest US event and great vendor hall
Internationale Spieltage (Fall – Essen, Germany) : World’s largest consumer show
BGG Con (Fall – Dallas) : Great exposure for demos

 
Click HERE for a Project Milestone Checklist that I use.
 
Don’t forget to join our Facebook Group for more interactive discussions:Tabletop Game Publisher’s Guild – https://www.facebook.com/groups/TabletopPublishers/
Tabletop Game Kickstarter Advice – https://www.facebook.com/groups/TabletopKickstarters/
Card &amp; Board Game Designers Guild – https://www.facebook.com/groups/GameDesignersGuild/
 
Additional References:
http://hyperbolegames.com/blog/so-you-want-be-tabletop-publisher
Top Ten Tips for Game Publishershttps://boardgamegeek.com/video/28772/tom-vasel/dice-tower-top-ten-tips-game-publishers
Board Game Business Podcast:https://boardgame.business/
The Cost of a Board Game in Time:http://nothingsacredgames.com/the-cost-of-a-board-game-time/
Jolly Games has some DYI tips:http://www.silcom.com/~tomjolly/design.htm
To share ideas and help other designers, join our Facebook Card &amp; Game Designer Guild
Designers events: http://www.Protospiel-Milwaukee.org
Obtaining an SMC number (first part of your sku) for use on your products in the hobby industry contact:
Heather Stoltzfus
HMA Executive Secretary
1410 East Erie Avenue
Philadelphia, Pa 19124
Phone: 267-341-1604
heather.stoltzfus@hmahobby.org
 
Written by: James Mathe

 

			
			
	
	
			

	
	
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Peter T on January 20, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Superb information! I’m infinitely grateful for people like yourself who share this kind if insight into the process and industry. Thank you for your time and effort.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mike McGannon on January 20, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Excellent article

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Don Lloyd on January 20, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thumbs up! I studied this list backwards and forwards and James hit the nail on the head. It is amazing that designers continue to jump into the ring not knowing even a fourth of what James has mentioned above. I felt comfortable that I knew two thirds of that information and still had troubles.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Wes on January 21, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Love the breakdown of each step! Made me feel more confident about steps that I already knew and gave me new direction in steps that I thought I knew, definitely going to reference this as much as I can and use it when I move to a different step.
James, what are your thoughts on the Chicago Toy Fair? Decent place to demo?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 21, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Chicago Toy Fair is really main stream so unless you have game that is main stream (party game, simple card game, gateway game) I wouldn’t bother with it. I haven’t gone and I am only 90 minutes away from it.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Teale Fristoe on January 21, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Great list! I wish I’d seen this before I started planning the money side of publishing my own game…

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mike Berg on January 22, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            I’m not sure what kind of card you could get and artist to make for $5 – $25, but it would likely have to be very simple. Good art takes time. This point sets the expectation unreasonably low, coming from an artist’s point of view.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 22, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Well I was talking about what we typically use which is mini-EURO/mini-US size cards and 20+ cards … so the detail is not high and there are many to get done and we’re a small company and find unknown artists to do them. So yeah $5 is probably not very realistic, but $25 sure is.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mike Berg on January 22, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Thanks for the response! I would clarify that in the post itself; artists have a hard enough time making a living without developers thinking we can do paintings for $5 a pop! 😛

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Randy P on January 23, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            This is such a fantastic post… very informative.  It’s like 10 years of learning condensed into an outline.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Nate Scheidler on January 23, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            In response to Don’s inquiry and James’ response on ChiTAG: yes, its a worthwhile place to demo. Any game designer/manufacturer wants to get their product in front of as many customers as possible. Some games are more complicated (either by intent or by lack of refinement) and best left to the niche gamers and demonstrated at events that cater specifically to that audience. Other games are more accessible to the general public, and these are the titles we see showing up increasingly in mass market outlets (Barnes &amp; Noble, Target) and selling in larger volumes.
If you’re coming to ChiTAG to demo, its because you have a product that you are either designing for the general public, or want to see how it fares with a general public audience. James may not have an interest in pursuing a larger customer audience with his titles, and that’s totally fair. If you think you are on the cusp of the next Settlers or Carcassonne, you might want to take advantage of our audience to get feedback on how you might best adjust your approach for mass market and broader retail/consumer appeal.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Not_jeff on January 28, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Replied mostly on twitter. Great article.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Randy on January 30, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            As far as safety testing goes, would it be wise to target the game at ages 13+ to avoid the possibility of having to pay for this? I have a hobby game that works for ages 10+, and I’m looking to set my Kickstarter goal. At the goal level I’m considering, safety testing would make the difference between profitability and unprofitability.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 30, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Look at all Minion Games products. They are all for 13+ as it avoids a lot of costs and hassles.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Kim Brebach on February 5, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Wow – such a great article thanks James for all the depth and sharing.
And congrats on your latest success with Hegemonic. I think i kicked it over 85K line! very cool looking game.
Question: When you kickstart games do you usually offer the profit share contract option to your designers? In your experience does that work out better for all as presumable you make a higher % of total profit while kickstarting? This is becoming a more critical question for designers looking to go the KS route with a KS friendly publisher like yourself vs the solo designer becomes a publisher via KS route or the standard publishing deal route. 
I assume the ‘designer goes with KS friendly publisher and a profit share’ will end up with a higher earning for designers than an industry standard publishing deal… but with a little more risk… Whilst not the all or nothing risk and stress of the total independent designer / publisher KS route. How has it played out for designers with your games so far? Do you think this will impact on the standard designer contracts and shake things up some?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on February 5, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Yes we offer their % off of the money we bring in as profit. While most companies only offer 5% or something off MSRP for any sold. In our case the designer gets much more money from each sale just like we do. In the later (much more standard) case the publisher would reap all the extra profits from the direct sale like Kickstarter. But like I said, there are very few that do contracts like I do.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Stephen Boyajian on February 5, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Very good resource for anyone wanting to know the process. For people looking to do the back end process (and not the design work), always be sure to be very specific with your details. Some manufacturers will not ask questions and will go off exactly what you have asked. Want glossy, but they offer matte as standard. Tell them, otherwise you are getting matte.
Also, check every price. Then check it again. Then check it 10 more times to make sure you missed nothing. Keep in mind that a unit cost of $7.80 probably doesn’t include the $3,000 in developing fee’s you need to cover or the shipping to the docks or the shipping to your local port. Generally you won’t get a shipping quote until they know exactly the size box you are using and the total weight of a unit.
Excellent guide. Thank you for posting.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									David Brashaw on February 16, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Great info James!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Omega2064 on March 18, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            A bit to add to the above.
While DA and other artists can be had cheap. The drawback is that these are amature artists and absolutely cannot be relied on to hit deadlines and some cannot do quantity art and ever hope to hit a headline. 
Give yourself A-LOT of lead time just to be sure. The more complex the piece, the longer the time.
Also do not hire artists who quote “per hour” prices. No.
Art is a per piece fee. Based on size, complexity, number of figures, theme, composition, etc, as well as the artists skill level.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mike V. on July 25, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Excellent article!! Many thanks! Do you know if by any chance the prices of smaller sized cards (mini american or mini european) actually are cheaper to produce? Or is their odd size not so convenient budgeting wise? I suppose they use them cause it is easier to ship more this way inside the final box. But I´m surprised that  I don´t see them used that much often. The same for modular boards. What happens if the amount of tiles in a modular game is more than what they would end up being together in a standard sized board? Does the cost increase that much? What extra costs when designing the components are in your experience the ones that are the most worthy? Negligible costs that would give you back more than their actual cost. (Like printing both sides of the board as you stated for example)

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on July 25, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            The mini-Euro and mini-American are actually cheaper to produce. We use them just because of that reason when we can. It’s not a lot but it can help you reduce your MSRP by a couple bucks. The cost for tiles is the die cost plus the cardboard and wasted bleed space. It’s always going to be more costly than a standard board of the same size. Reducing your chipboard (tokens and boards) from 2mm to 1.5mm is acceptable to most people and can help you trim a few more bucks off your retail price. Switching from 14mm wooden cubes to 12mm or 10mm can really save you money and is acceptable by the players. I’ve done 8mm in several games. Printing both sides of a board will cost you more but it’s not that much more, so if you can use it it’s a nice thing to do. Dice and Minis are the real killers for pricing games though.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Jarett Melville on September 21, 2013
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Excellent article.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Jessica, Galvanized Studios on August 23, 2014
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            What an amazing resource! Thank you so much for sharing your wealth of knowledge. We’ll definitely be studying this and updating our to do lists!

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Topgun505 on January 26, 2015
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            How about game ideas that are based off a given existing IP?  What do you have to do to get clearance from them and typically what % of the proceeds can you expect that company to want to soak up?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 26, 2015
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            In most cases companies are NOT going to let you design off their existing game property. If they do, it would be signing you on as a typical designer contract I think and they would publish it. It would be extremely rare for a company to allow you to make/print a game/addon for their IP.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Kevin David Queen on November 4, 2017
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            “remove fiddly bits or sub games” does this mean if I have two characters meet on a path and they have to play through a rock paper scissors mechanism that I should throw that out; ie, one player may throw down an ambush card and another player may respond by galloping away on a horse, or are you talking about something different?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on November 4, 2017
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            It means, a fun game is straightforward and simple and doesn’t need a ton of rules or tangental gameplay. Concentrate on what makes the game fun and do more of that and less of everything else. Does your requirement to play an RPS game actually do anything to make the game more fun? Is there another way to handle it?  Can you just ignore it if people meetup? Please ask game design questions in our forums: https://www.facebook.com/groups/GameDesignersGuild/ — not here.

                        
                    
                    


                

                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mr Loveless on January 29, 2018
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            This is such a good resource! Thank you for posting it. IF I may ask for some clarification, when talking about plastic figures you mention a fee of $3-5k for the mold setup. Should I expect that to be per unique mold?

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									James Mathe on January 29, 2018
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Per unique mold that can hold multiple things.

                        
                    
                    


                
                
                        
                        
							
                        
                    
                    
                    
                        
                            
									Mr Loveless on January 30, 2018
									                                

                                
									Reply ↓                                


                            Similar to a cardboard die, then? If I had say, four unique character figures, would they all be in one mold, or would they each be separate?

                        
                    
                    


                


	
		Leave a Reply Cancel reply			
				 

 
 
  oneall.api.plugins.social_login.build('oneall_social_login_providers_6570831', {
   'providers': ['facebook','twitter','google','linkedin'], 
   'callback_uri': (window.location.href + ((window.location.href.split('?')[1] ? '&amp;amp;': '?') + "oa_social_login_source=comments")), 
   'css_theme_uri': 'http://public.oneallcdn.com/css/api/socialize/themes/wordpress/default.css' 
  });
 Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * 
Email * 
Website 




      
  
  


CAPTCHA Code *


			
			
	


		
</body>
</html>
